Richmond: Scenes in the Life of a Bow Street Runner
## The first story in English featuring a professional detective.
_Richmond or Scenes in the Life of a Bow Street Officer drawn up from his private memoranda_, purports to be the biography of a Bow Street Runner. But was Richmond a real person? And, if Richmond is fictitious, who wrote the book? All that is certain is that Richmond, published in 1827 in London, is the first-ever story of a police detective in English.

Emily St. Aubert in _The Mysteries of Udolpho_ and Caleb Williams in _The Adventures of Caleb Williams_ can be considered to be the first characters in English fiction who act as sleuths by collecting evidence and making deductions from clues. Both these books were written in 1794 and both characters were amateurs as was Pelham in _The Adventures of a Gentleman_ written in 1828. These three characters were the first in a long line of amateur detectives; _Richmond_ is the first book about a professional detective. It was published in three leather-bound volumes.

The first volume recounts Tom Richmond’s early life. Always in search of adventure: he plays pranks on his neighbours; falls in love, and is sent away to boarding school; becomes a clerk in a counting-house in Liverpool; joins a troupe of actors, and ends up living with gypsies. 

En route he meets Jem Bucks, an actor, and Wilton, a poetic graduate of Oxford University and gets into scrapes with both of them. He becomes a Bow Street Runner at the end of the first volume.

The second and third volumes are tales of Tom as a Bow Street Runner, and his marriage to Maria Cherry, a former courtesan.

The book was first published in 1827 by Henry Colburn of New Burlington Street, London and printed by A.J. Valpy of Red Lion Court, Fleet Street. It seems the book was not published again until 1976 when Dover Publications in the UK published a facsimile of the 1827 publication. The Dover edition is no longer available on the Dover website, and, I believe, is out of print, although second hand copies are available from booksellers. [Quaystone Books] is the only publisher of the book since the Dover edition. 

The book was published originally in three volumes. Quaystone Books has amalgamated the three volumes into one volume. The chapters of the first volume are now numbered 1 to 21; the second volume is chapters 22 to 39, and the third volume is chapters 40 to 56.

So, the first question: was Tom Richmond a real person? Probably not. Only one person named Richmond ever worked with the Bow Street Runners during their 90-year existence from 1748 until 1839. He was a clerk called John Richmond who, in 1825, was dismissed because — to quote from the letter dismissing him — “he did not suffer a sense of duty or propriety to restrain the gratification of his lust, or his avarice”. Curiously, the first edition, published in 1827, has the following at the beginning of the book:
_Mr. JOHN RICHMOND, late a clerk in the Police Office, Bow Street, is not, in any manner, directly or indirectly, connected with this work   — London, March 16, 1827._
Presumably the statement is intended to give credence to the book being a true-life story. But other factors point to it being fiction. The same characters appear often. For example, Tom encounters Blore, a notorious highwayman, in a tavern in Lancashire, and Blore helps Tom escape the clutches of two constables who have arrested Tom, believing him to be an army deserter. Then Tom, on the road in Derbyshire, sees Blore hold up a phaeton, which happens to be driven by a Mr and Mrs Figgens, Tom’s old headmaster and his wife. Tom encounters Blore again, this time near London, when Tom is searching for a missing boy. Tom, not having seen Jem Bucks for some time, bumps into him in St James’s Park in London. Jem is dressed _“in a spruce blue coat and scarlet waistcoat”_. This is the uniform worn — not by the Runners but — by the associated Horse Patrol, said to be the first uniformed police force in England. The Runners always wore civilian clothes, as do modern-day police detectives. 

Tom then says: _“Through the influence of Wilton, I obtained a recommendation which was accepted; and I was admitted, sworn in, and commenced my duties among the law-breakers, as I shall record in the following chapters.”_

Tom’s eccentric and aristocratic friend, Wilton, might have had influence in high places, but even so, it is unlikely that Tom would have been appointed a Runner straightaway. Runners were usually appointed only after several years’ service with a patrol.

If _Richmond_ is fiction, who wrote the book? Two names are often mentioned; Thomas Skinner Surr and Thomas Gaspey, without any particular evidence of authorship by either. So, like the identity of _Jack the Ripper_, the culprit is likely to remain anonymous.

_Richmond_ is a good read. The plot of the _body in the pond_  is a vintage crime puzzle. The description of the Reverend Doctor Cockspur, the ghost-ridden vicar, could have been spoken by any hard-boiled detective: ”\_…a stranger entered with an air of impertinence which I did not much like. He was rather a little man, with a thin sharp face, small grey eyes half hid under a pair of shaggy eye-brows, but withal keen, greedy, and peering; a turn-up nose, tipped with a frost-bitten sort of red, to which there was a companion-spot of the same colour on each cheek about the breadth of a crown piece; the rest of his physiognomy being sallow, lank, and leathery, such as you might undertake to carve out of an old boot-top.”\_

The grammar, punctuation and spelling in the Quaystone edition are as in the original edition of 1827.

_Richmond: Scenes in the Life of a Bow Street Runner_ is available from [Amazon] as an ebook and as a paperback and a hardback.

